>> Woodruff:
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION SAID
TODAY THE FINANCIAL OUTLOOK FOR
MEDICARE IMPROVED SLIGHTLY AND
SOCIAL SECURITY HAS NOT
WORSENED.
BUT NEW DATA SHOWS AMERICANS
STILL STRUGGLING TO RECOVER FROM
THE RECESSION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
ON THE NEWSHOUR TONIGHT, WE
EXAMINE THE REPORT FROM FEDERAL
RESERVE ECONOMISTS FINDING THE
AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD HAS REGAINED
LESS THAN HALF ITS WEALTH SINCE
2007.
>> Woodruff: THEN WE DEBATE
WHAT'S TO BE DONE ABOUT STUDENT
LOANS AS PRESIDENT OBAMA PRESSED
CONGRESS AGAIN TODAY TO PREVENT
A DOUBLING OF SOME KEY INTEREST
RATES JULY 1.
>> Brown: WE GET TWO STORIES
ND ITS
IMPACT ON THE WIDER MIDDLE EAST.
MARGARET WARNER IS ON THE GROUND
IN BEIRUT AND SPOKE WITH THE
LEADER OF THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY.
>> HE SAID "I CANNOT UNDERSTAND
WHY OUR FRIEND IN THE WEST DON'T
HELP US WHEN THEY SEE HOW MUCH
THE IRANIANS AND THE RUSSIANS
ARE DOING FOR ASSAD'S FORCES."
>> Woodruff: AND RAY JUAREZ
LOOKS AT THE PLIGHT OF HUNDREDS
OF THOUSANDS OF SYRIAN REFUGEES
WHO HAVE PORED INTO NEIGHBORING
JORDAN.
>> Brown: PLUS MARK SHIELDS
AND DAVID BROOKS ONL ANALYZE THE
WEEK'S NEWS.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S ALL AHEAD
ON TONIGHT'S NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS SAID TODAY THE TRUST
FUND FUELING THE NATION'S
MEDICARE PROGRAM IS IN SOMEWHAT
STRONGER SHAPE THAN IT WAS LAST
YEAR.
THEY PROJECTED IT WILL STAY
SOLVENT UNTIL 2026, TWO YEARS
LATER THAN LAST YEAR'S
PROJECTIONS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE BUDGET
OUTLOOK FOR THE NATION'S SOCIAL
SECURITY PROGRAM REMAINS
UNCHANGED.
IT IS PROJECTED TO STAY SOLVENT
UNTIL FUNDING RUNS OUT IN 2033.
MEANWHILE, A NEW FEDERAL RESERVE
STUDY FOUND THAT WHILE SOME
AMERICANS ARE REBOUNDING FROM
THE ECONOMIC RECESSION, OTHERS
CONTINUE TO STRUGGLE.
AMONG THE RESULTS:
ON AVERAGE ONLY 45% OF THE
$16 TRILLION OF WEALTH LOST
DURING THE RECESSION.
TWO-THIRDS OF THAT REGAINED
WEALTH IS TIED TO RISING STOCK
PRICES, WHICH HAVE
DISPROPORTIONATELY BENEFITED
WELL-OFF AMERICANS.
BUT FOR MIDDLE- AND LOWER-INCOME
HOUSEHOLDS, THE ECONOMIC PICTURE
IS NOT SO BRIGHT, DUE IN LARGE
PART TO DEPRESSED HOME PRICES,
STILL 30% BELOW THEIR PEAK.
TO DISCUSS WHAT THIS MEANS FOR
THE NATION'S ECONOMIC RECOVERY,
WE TALK TO A CO-AUTHOR OF THAT
REPORT.
WILLIAM EMMONS IS CHIEF
ECONOMIST AT THE CENTER FOR
HOUSEHOLD FINANCIAL STABILITY AT
THE FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF
SAINT LOUIS.
WELCOME TO THE NEWSHOUR.
SO IT'S CLEAR, MR. EMMONS, THAT
FOR MANY AMERICANS THEY'RE DOING
VERY WELL SINCE THIS RECESSION.
BUT FOR OTHERS IN YOUR REPORT
THEY'RE NOT.
WHO ARE THOSE WHO ARE STILL
STRUGGLING?
>> THOSE THAT ARE STRUGGLING
TEND TO BE YOUNGER FAMILIES,
SOME MIDDLE-AGED FAMILIES.
IN GENERAL ALSO FAMILIES WHOSE
HEADS HAVE LESS EDUCATION.
ALSO MEMBERS OF HISTORICALLY
DISADVANTAGED MINORITIES,
AFRICAN AMERICANS AND HISPANICS.
SO THOSE ARE THE DEMOGRAPHIC
FEATURES OF FAMILIES STRUGING
THE MOST.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT THE -- SO
THERE'S A BRIGHT LINE YOU CAN
DRAW BETWEEN -- IT'S PEOPLE AT
THE LOWER END OF THE ECONOMIC
SCALE?
>> ACTUALLY, THE SAME FAMILIES
THAT WE KNEW WERE STRUGGLING A
BIT EVEN BEFORE THE DOWNTURN ARE
STILL STRUGGLING.
>> Woodruff: WELL, LET ME ASK
YOU.
THERE WAS A NATIONAL FEDERAL
RESERVE REPORT, AS YOU KNOW,
THAT CAME OUT NOT LONG AGO.
>> YES.
>> Woodruff: THAT SAID 91% OF
THE WEALTH THAT HAD BEEN LOST
DURING THE RECESSION HAS SINCE
BEEN RESTORED.
HOW DOES THAT SQUARE WITH WHAT
YOUR FINDINGS ARE?
>> THAT'S THE STARTING POINT.
THOSE NUMBERS THROUGH THE END OF
LAST YEAR, THE NEXT REPORT WILL
BE COMING OUT IN EARLY JUNE THAT
WILL BRING US THROUGH THE END OF
THE FIRST QUARTER.
THOSE NUMBERS GAVE THAT 91%
RECOVERY FIGURE.
THEN WE ADJUSTED THAT FOR
INFLATION THAT'S OCCURRED SINCE
THAT TIME, SINCE THE PEAK IN
2007, AND ALSO ADJUSTED FOR THE
NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS, THE
POPULATION HAS GROWN.
WHEN YOU MAKE THOSE TWO
ADJUSTMENTS, IN FACT, YOU GET
THIS LOWER LEVEL.
SO IT'S -- THAT EARLIER REPORT
IS ABSOLUTELY THE FOUNDATION OF
WHAT WE DID.
WE JUST ADJUSTED IT TO PUT IT IN
TERMS THAT I THINK ARE PROBABLY
MORE REALISTIC FOR MOST
FAMILIES.
WHAT CAN THEIR MONEY BUY AND
WHAT DOES AN INDIVIDUAL FAMILY
FEEL IN TERMS OF THE SHARE OF
WEALTH?
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS KNOWN
ABOUT HOW MANY OF THESE FAMILIES
WHO VERY STILL BELOW WATER, IF
YOU WILL, IN TERMS OF NOT
REGAINING WEALTH.
HOW ABOUT HOW MANY OF THEM WERE
OVEREXTENDED BEFORE THE
FINANCIAL CRASH?
HAD BORROWED TOO MUCH, WERE
BORROWING TOO MUCH OFF THEIR
HOMES, WERE JUST MORE IN DEBT
THAN THEY NEEDED TO BE?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
MORE SO THAN IN EARLIER TIMES
BEFORE DOWNTURNS WE KNOW FROM
SOME OF THE DAY THAT THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT THAT AN UNUSUALLY
LARGE NUMBER OF FAMILIES, IN
FACT, AS YOU SAID, HAD A LOT OF
DEBT RELATIVE TO THEIR INCOME.
THE VALUE OF THEIR ASSETS ALSO
LOTS OF CONCENTRATION IN HOUSING
ON THE ASSET SIDE OF THEIR
BALANCE SHEETS.
ALSO, AS WE KNOW, VERY LOW
SAVINGS RATES AND FOR SOME
FAMILIES USING EXPENSIVE
FINANCIAL SERVICES.
SO THOSE ARE REALLY THE KEY
VULNERABILITIES, WHAT WE CALL
BALANCE SHEET FAILURES THAT, AS
YOU SUGGEST, WERE EVEN MORE
COMMON GOING INTO THIS DOWNTURN
THAN WAS USUAL.
AND, OF COURSE, THE DOWNTURN
THEN EXACERBATED THOSE PROBLEMS.
>> Woodruff: SO TO THE EXTENT
THEY WERE OVEREXTENDED, HAD
BORROWED TOO MUCH, COULD ONE
ARGUE THAT IT'S SMART, THAT IT'S
WISE FOR THEM TO BE MORE
CAUTIOUS IN WHAT THEY'RE
SPENDING RIGHT NOW?
NOT TO GO BACK INTO DEBT?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK IT MAKES PERFECT SENSE
THAT PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO
REBUILD THEIR FINANCIAL
STRENGTH, REBUILD THEIR BALANCE
SHEETS.
AND THAT INVOLVES IN SOME CASES
PAYING DOWN DEBT OR NOT TAKING
ON AS MUCH DEBT AS THEY HAD IN
THE PAST.
CERTAINLY PEOPLE ARE STRUGGLING
TO REATTACH TO THE JOB MARKET.
THE JOB MARKET IS WEAK.
INCOME GROWTH IS STRONG.
AND ALSO DIVERSIFYING A LITTLE
BIT BEYOND HOUSING.
SO THOSE ARE ABSOLUTELY THE
THINGS THAT YOU WOULD EXPECT
PEOPLE TO TRY TO DO TO RESPOND
TO THIS SORT OF A DOWNTURN.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS IT GOING
TO TAKE TO RESTORE FULLY THE
WEALTH THAT AMERICANS HAD BEFORE
THE FINANCIAL CRASH?
OR IS THERE REASON TO BELIEVE IT
WON'T BE RESTORED?
>> I THINK THERE ARE REASONS TO
THINK IT WILL TAKE A LONG TIME
TO GET BACK TO ANY SEMBLANCE OF
WHAT WE HAD BEFORE.
NOW, PROBABLY IN 2005, 2006, AND
2007, THAT WAS UNREALISTIC.
WE HAD, REMEMBER, A HOUSING
BUBBLE SO WE REALLY DON'T EXPECT
HOUSING VALUES TO GET BACK TO
THOSE LEVELS ANY TIME SOON.
ALSO THE STOCK MARKET WAS VERY
STRONG.
SO IN ANSWER TO YOUR QUESTION, I
THINK LILT TAKE YEARS TO GET
BACK TO ANYTHING CLOSE TO WHAT
WE HAD BUT IT COULD ALSO BE THAT
AS WE LOOK BACK THAT THAT WAS AN
UNUSUAL PEAK LEVEL OF WEALTH
THAT WASN'T IN THE END
SUSTAINABLE.
>> Woodruff: WHEN YOU SAY
TAKES YEARS, MEANING YEARS FOR
COMPANIES, FOR EMPLOYERS TO
HIRE?
YEARS FOR WAGES TO GO UP?
IS THAT WHAT YOU'RE REFERRING
TO?
>> THAT'S, OF COURSE, THE RAW
MATERIAL.
MOST PEOPLE ARE GOING TO REBUILD
THOSE BALANCE SHEET US THERE THE
EARNINGS FROM WORK AND SAVINGS
AND, OF COURSE, SOME
APPRECIATION OF ASSET VALUES,
STOCK PRICES HAVE GONE UP A LOT,
HOUSE PRICES MAYBE WILL INCREASE
A BIT MORE.
SO THAT -- ALL OF THOSE THINGS
COMBINED AS WELL AS MANAGING THE
DEBT.
SO WE DON'T HAVE THE BUILDUP OF
DEBT WE HAD BEFORE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY, FROM
LOOKING AT ALL THAT YOU'VE
LOOKED AT, MR. EMMONS, WHAT
WOULD YOU SAY ARE THE LESSONS WE
SHOULD LEARN FOR THE NEXT TIME
CRISIS?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT AND I THINK -- AS I
SAID I THINK WE WERE OVERLY
DEPENDENT ON HOUSING.
PEOPLE HAD TOO MUCH OF THEIR
WEALTH INVESTED IN HOUSING.
WE HAD TOO MUCH DEBT
RELATIVITY-TO-CERTAINLY OUR
INCOME, WE COULD SEE THAT BEFORE
THE DOWNTURN AFTER HOUSE PRICES
DECLINE WE CAN SEE IT WAS TOO
MUCH DEBT RELATIVE TO THE VALUE
OF EVEN THE HOUSES AND JUST IN
TERMS OF BUILDING SAVINGS,
BUILDING WEALTH THROUGH SAVINGS,
AS YOU SUGGEST, WE REALLY DO
NEED A MORE CONSISTENT HIGHER
LEVEL OF HOUSEHOLD SAVINGS TO
HELP BUILD IN THOSE BUFFERS INTO
A STRONGER BALANCE SHEET.
>> Woodruff: WELL IT HELPS US
TO UNDERSTAND ALL OF THAT
THROUGH YOUR RESEARCH.
WILLIAM EMMONS WITH THE ST.
LOUIS FEDERAL RESERVE.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
THE POSSIBLE DOUBLING OF
INTEREST TES RAON STUDENT LOANS,
MARGARET WARNER IN LEBANON,
SYRIAN REFUGEES IN JORDAN,
AND SHIELDS AND BROOKS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: FLASH FLOODING AND
TORNADOES KILLED THREE PEOPLE IN
ARKANSAS OVERNIGHT, AND A NEW
STRING OF STORMS MARCHED ACROSS
THE NATION'MIDSS ECTION TODAY.
UP TO A DOZEN TORNADOES TOUCHED
DOWN IN ARKANSAS ALONE, AS WELL
AS ONE IN ILLINOIS AND THREE IN
OKLAHOMA THAT CAUSED STRUCTURAL
DAMAGE TO HOMES.
THE STORM SYSTEM BROUGHT HEAVY
RAIN WITH IT, MAKING FLASH
FLOODING A PROBLEM ACROSS THE
REGION.
IN TE WEHSTERN U.S.,
FIREFIGHTERS FOUGHT TWO GROWING
WILDFIRES.
A RAPIDLY MOVING BLAZE SOME 25
MILES WEST OF SANTE FE, NEW
MEXI, HACOS ALREADY SCORCHED
1,000 ACRES AND JUMPED A
HIGHWAY.
MEANWHILE, 500 FIREFIGHTERS IN
CALIFORNIA TRIED TO CONTROL A
1,400-ACRE WILDFIRE IN THE
ANGELES NATIONAL FOREST, NORTH
OF LOS ANGELES.
IT WAS ONLY 15% CONTAINED.
THE F.B.I. HAS CONFIRMED THREE
LETTERS TAINTED WITH RICIN,
INCLUDING ONE SENT TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA, WERE POSTMARKED ON THE
SAME DAY FROM SPOKANE,
WASHINGTON.
THE OTHER POISONED MAILINGS
TARGETED A FEDERAL JUDGE AND A
POST OFFICE IN SPOKANE.
A FOURTH LETTER SENT TO NEARBY
FAIRCHILD AIR FORCE BASE STILL
IS BEING TESTED.
THE F.B.I. ALSO IS TRYING TO
TRACK DOWN A FIFTH SUSPICIOUS
LETTER EN ROUTE TO THE C.I.A.
THE SECRET SERVICE SAID THE
LETTS WEERRE SIMILAR TO ONES
SENT TO NEW YORK CITY MAYOR
MICHAEL BLOOMBERG.
THE U.S. URGED RUSSIA TODAY NOT
TO SEND SYRIA'S ASSAD REGIME
HIGHLY SPECIALIZED WEAPONS THAT
COULD PROLONG THAT COUNTRY'S
CIVIL WAR.
TODAY, THE RUSSIAN MANUFACTURER
OF MIG FIGHTER JETS ANNOUNCED
PLANS TO SIGN A NEW AGREEMENT TO
SHIP AT LEAST TEN OF THE
AIRCRAFT TO SYRIA.
SEPARATELY, RUSSIA SAID IT WILL
SUPPLY SYRIA WITH AN ORDER FOR
ANTIAIRCRAFT MISSILES.
IN WASHINGTON TODAY, SECRETARY
OF STATE JOHN KERRY SAID THOSE
ACTIONS WOULD ONLY HINDER
EFFORTS AT PEACE NEGOTIATION.
>> IT IS NOT HELPFUL TO HAVE
IS-300 TRANSFERRED TO THE REGION
WHILE YOU ARE TRYING TO ORGANIZE
THIS PEACE AND CREATE PEACE.
IT IS NOT HELPFUL TO HAVE A LOT
OF OTHER AMMUNITION, OTHER
SUPPLIES OVERTLY GOING IN.
NOT JUST FROM THE RUSSIANS-- AND
THEY ARE SUPPLYING THAT KIND OF
THING-- BUT ALSO FROM THE
IRANIANS AND HEZBOLLAH.
>> Holman: WE'LL HAVE MORE ON
THE SITUATION IN AND AROUND
SYRIA LATER IN THE PROGRAM
TONIGHT.
UNEMPLOYMENT IN THE EUROZONE HIT
A RECORD HIGH OF 12.2% FOR THE
MONTH OF APRIL.
THAT CALCULATES TO MORE THAN 19
MILLION PEOPLE OUT OF WORK
ACROSS THE 17 COUNTRIES THAT USE
THE EURO.
THE EUROPEAN UNION'S STATISTICS
OFFICE WARNED THAT IF THE
JOBLESS RATE CONTINUES AT THIS
PACE, 20 MILLION PEOPLE COULD BE
UNEMPLOYED BY THE END OF THE
YEAR.
SPAIN AND GREECE ALREADY HAVE
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES ABOVE 25
PERCENT.
A LATE AFTERNOON SELL-OFF ON
WALL STREET SENT STOCKS
TUMBLING.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 209 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
15,115.
THE NASDAQ FELL 35 POINTS TO
CLOSE JUST BELOW 3,456.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW LOST MORE
THAN 1%.
THE NASDAQ FELL 0.1%.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AND WE TURN TO:
A JULY 1 DEADLINE FOR INTEREST
RATES ON STUDENT LOANS;
AND THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF
GROWING STUDENT DEBT.
>> NS E TIME FOR US TO
TURN BACK ON YOUNG PEOPLE.
>> Brown: FLANK BID STUDENTS
IN THE ROSE GARDEN TODAY,
PRESIDENT OBAMA THEN PRESSED
CONGRESS NOT TO LET AVERAGE
RATES DOUBLE.
>> THAT MEANS THE AVERAGE
STUDENT WILL WRACK UP AN
ADDITIONAL $1,000 IN DEBT.
THAT'S LIKE A THOUSAND DOLLAR
TAX HIKE.
I ASSUME MOST OF YOU CANNOT
AFFORD THAT.
>> Brown: THE PRESIDENT MADE A
SIMILAR PUSH LAST YEAR BEFORE
CONGRESS ULTIMATELY AGREED TO A
ONE-YEAR FIX.
THAT KEPT FEDERALLY
SUBSIDIZED STAFFORD STUDENT
LOANS FROM JUMPING FROM 3.4% TO
6.8%.
A YEAR LATER, LAWMAKERS FROM
BOTH PARTIES ARE EAGER TO AVERT
THE SAME HIKE BUT THEY'RE AT
ODDS OVER HOW.
>> MOTION TO RECONSIDER IS LAID
ON THE TABLE.
>> Brown: LAST WEEK, THE
REPUBLICAN-LED HOUSE PASSED ITS
ANSWER: A BILL THAT WOULD AVOID
THE IMPENDING RATE INCREASE BUT
TIE RATES ON FUTURE LOANS TO
TREASURY BONDS AND ALLOW THE
RATES TO FLOAT WITH THE MARKET.
HOUSE EDUCATION AND WORK FORCE
COMMITTEE CHAIRMAN JOHN KLEIN.
>> WE HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO
PROVIDE STUDENTS WITH MORE
STABILITY IN THE LONG RUN BY
PUTTING AN END TO QUICK FIXES
AND CAMPAIGN PROMISES AND WE
HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY TO BUILD
UPON COMMON GROUND WITH THE
ADMINISTRATION TO ADVANCE A
BIPARTISAN SOLUTION THAT'S A WIN
FOR BOTH STUDENTS AND TAXPAYERS.
>> Brown: IT'S A PLAN NOT
LIKELY TO PASS THE DEMOCRATIC
CONTROLLED SENATE WHERE THERE'S
A PUSH TO EXTEND THE CURRENT
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES.
FOR HIS PART, THE PRESIDENT HAS
ALSO PROPOSED TYING RATES TO
TREASURY NOTES, BUT HE WOULD
ALLOW STUDENTS TO LOCK IN THEIR
INITIAL RATES FOR THE LIFE OF
THE LOANS.
>> THE HOUSE BILL ISN'T SMART
AND IT'S NOT FAIR.
I'M GLAD THE HOUSE IS PAYING
ATTENTION TO IT, BUT THEY DIDN'T
DO IT THE RIGHT WAY.
>> Brown: REPLYING IN A
STATEMENT TODAY, HOUSE SPEAKER
JOHN BOEHNER ACCUSED THE
PRESIDENT OF PLAYING PARTISAN
GAMES WRITING:
>> Brown: MEANWHILE, THE
DEMOCRATIC CONGRESSIONAL
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE-- THE
CAMPAIGN ARM OF HOUSE
DEMOCRATS-- ANNOUNCED IT HAS
TAKEN OUT ADDS IN SIX COLLEGE
PAPERS ACROSS THE COUNTRY IN A
BID TO PRESSURE HOUSE
REPUBLICANS ON THE ISSUE AHEAD
OF THE 2014 MIDTERM ELECTIONS.
WE EXAMINE SOME OF THE POSSIBLE
SOLUTIONS AHEAD OF THE JULY 1
RATE HIKE.
WITH ME ARE LEADERS OF TWO
NONPROFIT GROUPS THAT ADVOCATE
FOR THE MILLENNIAL GENERATION.
MATTHEW SEGAL IS PRESIDENT OF
ourtime.org.
HE WAS AT THE WHITE HOUSE THIS
WEEK DISCUSSING THE ISSUE.
EVAN FEINBERG IS PRESIDENT OF
GENERATION OPPORTUNITY.
LAST YEAR HE MADE AN
UNSUCCESSFUL RUN FOR CONGRESS AS
A REPUBLICAN.
ALSO JOINING US IS ANYA
KAMENETZ.
SHE'S THE AUTHOR OF "GENERATION
DEBT."
WELCOME ALL.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: MATTHEW SEGAL, LET
ME START WITH YOU.
BEFORE THE PRESIDENT AND THE
CONGRESS, WHAT IN A NUTSHELL DO
YOU THINK IS THE BEST APPROACH
RIGHT NOW?
>> I THINK FIRST OF ALL WE NEED
TO PUT THIS IN A LARGER CONTEXT
AND GO AFTER THE SOURCE OF THE
PROBLEM WHICH IS THE SPIRALING
COST OF EDUCATION IN THE FIRST
PLACE WHICH IS FAR OUTPACING THE
COST OF INFLATION.
IT'S FAR OUTPACING THE COST OF
ANY GOOD.
AND UNTIL WE REALLY REIN IN ON
THE COST OF EDUCATION, LOOK AT
THE STATES, 47 STATES HAVE CUT
HIGHER EDUCATION, LOOK AT THE
FACT THAT COLLEGES ARE NOT
NECESSARILY SPENDING THEIR MONEY
ON LEARN BUG, IN FACT, ON THE
COLLEGE EXPERIENCE, INVESTING
THEIR MONEY IN THE WRONG SORTS
OF PRIORITIES THAT ARE FOR
PRESTIGE AS OPPOSED TO THE CORE
COMPETENCY OF THE SCHOOL.
AND IMPROVE THE JOB MARKET SO
THERE'S NOT SUCH A MONOPOLY ON
NEEDED TO GO TO COLLEGE AS THE
ONLY WAY FORWARD.
THAT'S WHERE THE REAL
CONVERSATION NEEDS TO HAPPEN.
AS FAR AS STUDENT INTEREST RATES
ARE GOING, THAT IS MANUFACTURED
CRISIS THAT WE HAVE KICKED THE
CAN DOWN ON T ROAD ON AND I
THINK ULTIMATELY THERE WILL BE A
23rd HOUR DEAL THAT HAS SOME
COMBINATION OF PRETTY MUCH
HAVING THE 3.4% RATE CONTINUE
FOR A YEAR UNTIL WE CAN HAVE THE
LARGER DEBATE.
>> Brown: EVAN FEINBERG, DOALE E
PROBLEM?
WHAT'SOUR Y POSSIBLE SOLUTION?
>> WELL, I AGREE THE THAT
COLLEGE AFFORDABILITY IS THE
IMPORTANT ISSUE HERE.
YOUNG PEOPLE SIMPLY CAN'T AFFORD
COLLEGE TODAY IN TODAY'S ECONOMY
BUT I DISAGREE ABOUT THE CAUSE
OF THAT.
I THINK BOTH SIDES ARE
PANDERING, TRYING TO OFFER TO
YOUNG PEOPLE A LOWER INTEREST
RATE ON THEIR STUDENT LOANS WHEN
THEY'RE MISSING THE ENTIRE
PROBLEM.
GOVERNMENT IS' MEDDLING,
GOVERNMENT'S INVOLVEMENT,
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEEING SO MUCH
OF THE COST OF HIGHER EDGE
STATION WHAT'S MADE IT SO
EXPENSIVE IN THE FIRST PLACE.
SO I THINK BOTH PARTIES RIGHT
NOW -- THERE ISN'T A HUGE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO OF
THEM.
>> Brown: YOU'RE SEEING THE
SUBSIDY -- WHATEVER THE INTEREST
RATE IS AS A SUBSIDY THAT IS
PART OF THE PROBLEM?
>> YEAH.
SO THE GOVERNMENT TOOK OVER
STUDENT LOANS ALMOST ENTIRELY AS
A PART OF OBAMACARE, BUT REALLY
THE GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
CONTROLLING THE STUDENT LOAN
MARKET FOR A LONG TIME AND BY
SUBSIDIZING AND GUARANTEEING SO
MUCH OF THE COST OF HIGHER
EDUCATION GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN
THE PROBLEM NOT THE SOLUTION TO
THE PROBLEM OF COLLEGE
AAFFORDABILITY.
>> Brown: LET ME BRING ANYA
KAMENETZ IN HERE.
HELP DESCRIBE THE SYSTEM AS IT
EXISTS RIGHT NOW.
>> SURE.
SO, YOU KNOW, I THINK MATTHEW'S
GOT A LOT OF GOOD POINTS ABOUT
THE COST OF HIGHER EDUCATION AND
WHAT WE'RE MISSING HERE IS THE
WAY THAT THE COST AND THE
ABILITY TO FINANCE THAT COST FIT
INTO EACH OTHER.
SO, YOU KNOW, WE TALK ABOUT A
SUBSIDY AND OBAMA TALKED ABOUT A
TAX.
THE IMPORTANT THING TO REMEMBER
HERE IS THAT BY TAKING OVER THE
STUDENT LOAN INDUSTRY, THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS ACTUALLY
EARNING $50 BILLION A YEAR ON
MAKING THOSE STUDENT LOANS.
AND BY PROVIDING THAT EASY
FINANCING, THAT EASY CREDIT TO
STUDENTS, IT MAKES IT THAT MUCH
EASIER FOR THE STATES TO TURN
AROUND AND PASS THE COST OR
SHIFT THE COST FROM THE STATES
ON THE THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
VIA THIS MEANS OF STUDENT LOANS.
SO YOU REALLY HAVE A VERY NASTY
VICIOUS CIRCLE WHERE TUITION
CONTINUES TO GROW, AFFORDABILITY
WE SEE IS A REALLY HUGE PROBLEM,
PARTICULARLY FOR STUDENTS FROM
LOWER INCOME QUADRANTS.
ACCESSIBILITY IS NOT WORKING.
PELL GRANTS AREN'T WORKING THE
WAY THAT THEY SHOULD AND NONE OF
THIS IS REALLY THE WAY THAT WE
WOULD DESIGN IT IF WE WERE TO
START OVER FROM SCRATCH.
>> Brown: MATTHEW, PICK UP ON
SOME OF THAT.
BECAUSE IN TERMS OF THE INTEREST
RATE ITSELF, YOU THINK THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD PLAY, AS
OPPOSED TO WHAT EVAN FEINBERG
WAS SAYING, YOU THINK THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD PLAY SOME ROLE
IN THAT SUBSIDY?
>> WELL, I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
TO CLARIFY THAT MORE STUDENT
LOANS IS NOBODY'S SOLUTION.
STUDENT LOBES ARE NOT A GOOD
THING.
IN FACT, IDEALLY I BELIEVE-- AND
MANY YOUNG PEOPLE BELIEVE-- THAT
COLLEGE IS -- AND HIGHER
EDUCATION IS A PUBLIC GOOD AND
THAT WE AS A SOCIETY ALL BENEFIT
FROM IT SO WE HAVE TO MAKE IT
AFFORDABLE.
THE WAY WE'RE GOING TO MAKE IT
AFFORDABLE ARE THROUGH PELL
GRANTS, STATE FUNDING AND
THROUGH MAKING SURE THAT
COLLEGES USE THEIR ENDOWMENT
MONEY AND THEIR TUITION MONEY TO
GO INTO LEARNING AND
SCHOLARSHIPS AND AID AS OPPOSED
TO THIS ARMS RACE TO THE TOP, IF
YOU WILL, THAT PEOPLE IN THE
COLLEGE ADMINISTRATOR WORLD ARE
PUTTING INTO THE "U.S. NEWS AND
WORLD REPORT" RANKINGS WHICH I
LIKE TO CALL THE "U.S. NEWS AND
WORLD REPORT" INDUSTRLIA COMPLEX
BECAUSE IT PERVERSE INCENTIVIZES
SCHOOLS TO TRY TO BUILD
MEGABUILDINGS AND FOOTBALL
FIELDS AS OPPOSED TO ACTUALLY
WORRYING ABOUT LEARNING WHICH IS
OBVIOUSLY THE NECESSITY AND CORE
COMPETENCY OF THE SCHOOL.
BUT I THINK IN TERMS OF THE
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIZING LOANS,
YES, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE MASSIVE
INCOME INEQUALITY TO A CERTAIN
DEGREE UNLESS WE DO INCENTIVIZE
YOUNGER PEOPLE WHO ARE FROM LOW
INCOME BACKGROUNDS TO TAKE OUT
LOANS THAT ARE NOT GOING TO BE
SUBJECT TO USURY AND HIKED RATES
FROM PRIVATE LENDERS WHO, YOU
KNOW, ARE MAKING COLLEGE A BIG
BUSINESS FOR THEM.
AND SHOULD COLLEGE BE A BOOMING
BUSINESS?
THAT'S WHERE THERE'S A
PHILOSOPHICAL DISAGREEMENT AMONG
DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS OR
JUST PEOPLE FROM DIFFERENT
POLITICAL SPECTRUMS.
>> Brown: DO YOU WANT TO
RESPOND?
>> I THINK MATT'S TALKING ABOUT
THE COLLEGE INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX
WHICH IS A VERY REAL PROBLEM AS
THE GOVERNMENT CONTINUES TO PUT
MORE AND MORE RESOURCES INTO
HIGHER EDUCATION.
>> Brown: SO WAIT, YOU AGREE
ON THE INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX BUT
YOU THINK IT'S PARTLY CAUSED BY
GOVERNMENT?
>> SURE.
ANYA MENTIONED THAT THE
GOVERNMENT PROFITS OFF OF ALL
THESE LOANS.
I'M NOT SURE MOST YOUNG PEOPLE
ARE EXCITED THAT THE GOVERNMENT
IS A HUGE BANK THAT MAKES
PROFITS OFF OF STUDENT LOANS AND
IS DRIVING UP THE PRICE OF
EDUCATION.
RIGHT NOW WE'RE DEBATING THE
DIFFERENCE IN THE RATE ON A
GOVERNMENT LOAN RATHER THAN THE
SIZE OF THAT LOAN IN THE FIRST
PLACE.
AS GOVERNMENT KEEPS PUTTING MORE
AND MORE RESOURCES INTO IT, IT
GROWS THE COST.
IF WE GAVE EVERY YOUNG PERSON IN
AMERICA $100 TO BUY AN IPHONE
TOMORROW, WHAT WOULD APPLE DO?
THEY'D RAISE THE PRICE OF
IPHONES BECAUSE THEY KNEW
EVERYONE IN THE COUNTRY HAD $100
MORE TO PAY FOR AN IPHO IS THATE
GOVERNMENT IS PUTTING SO MUCH
MONEY, SOME SO MANY GUARANTEES,
SO MANY RULES AND REGULATIONS ON
HIGHER EDUCATION IT'S DRIVING
THE PRICE THROUGH THE ROOF.
>> Brown: ANYA, DO YOU SEE --
YOU LOOK AROUND THE COUNTRY AT
DIFFERENT THINGS, EXPERIMENTS
GOING ON.
DO YOU SEE INTERESTING THINGS
THAT MIGHT HELP US FIND WAYS
THROUGH ALL THIS?
>> YOU KNOW, I REALLY DO.
AND THERE'S A REALLY FANTASTIC
ANNOUNCEMENT JUST MADE YESTERDAY
BY CORPS SARA, WHICH IS ONE OF
THE MASSIVELY OPEN ONLINE COURSE
PLATFORMS.
THEY HAVE OVER THREE MILLION
STUDENTS ENROLLED IN VERSIONS OF
COURSES FROM COLLEGES LIKE
HARVARD AND M.I.T. THAT ARE
ABSOLUTELY FREE.
COURSERA HAS PENN AND STANFORD.
THEY'VE ANNOUNCED PARTNERSHIPS
WITH UNIVERSITY SYSTEMS AND
THESE UNIVERSITIES IN STATES
COAST TO COAST ENROLLING OVER A
MILLION STUDENTS ARE LOOKING AT
WAYS TO SHARE RESOURCES, TO
COLLABORATE AND USE TECHNOLOGY
TO BUILD THE INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
WHAT WE'D ALL LIKE TO SEE WHICH
IS RADICALLY MORE AFFORDABLE AND
MORE ACCESSIBLE HIGH-QUALITYING
EXPERIENCING THAT CAN COST
THROUGH THE COST FOG.
IT'S TRUE THAT THE ROLE OF EASY
FINANCE AND THE ABILITY TO
BORROW HAS DRIVEN UP THE COST
AND MADE -- MUDDY IT HAD WATERS
A LITTLE BIT.
BUT WE ALL THINK-- OR MANY OF US
BELIEVE, ESPECIALLY ON THE
DEMOCRATIC SIDE-- THAT THERE IS
A ROLE FOR SUBSIDIZING EDUCATION
AS A PUBLIC GOOD.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT IS THE BEST
WAY TO DO THAT?
I BELIEVE THAT TECHNOLOGY OFFERS
A FASCINATING WAY FORWARD FOR A
COLLEGE EDUCATION THAT IS MORE
LIKE WHAT OUR PARENTS
EXPERIENCED.
WHICH IS IN THE 1970s A YOUNG
PERSON COULD GO TO COLLEGE, A
STATE UNIVERSITY, AND THEY COULD
PAY FOR THAT WITH A PART-TIME
JOB.
AND THAT'S WHAT WE'D ALL LIKE TO
GET BACK TO.
>> Brown: I'M GUESSING THAT
YOU'D ALL AGREE THAT THE STUDENT
DEBT PROBLEM IS HURTING THE
ECONOMY.
SOMETHING WE HEARD IN OUR
EARLIER SEGMENT.
>> IT'S MASSIVELY HURTING THE
ECONOMY.
>> Brown: DO YOU THINK THE
REST OF THE POPULATION
UNDERSTANDS THAT?
>> NO.
I THINK THE PROBLEM IS WE HAVE A
STUDENT LOAN DEBT CRISIS THAT
PEOPLE THINK IS JUST FOR
STUDENTS WHEN, IN FACT, 50% OF
THE PEOPLE WITH OUTSTANDING
STUDENT LOAN DEBT IN THIS
COUNTRY ARE OVER THE AGE OF 30.
BY THE WAY, PEOPLE WHO ARE
SENIORS HAVE STUDENT LOANS AND
THEY WILL DEDUCT IT BECAUSE YOU
CAN NOT FORGIVE STUDENT LOAN
DEBT OR RESTRUCTURE STU BANKRUPE
THERE ARE VERY FEW, IF NOT
NEGLIGIBLE PROTECTIONS FOR
STUDENT BORROWERS.
THEY WILL TAKE IT OUT OF YOUR
SOCIAL SECURITY.
SO I THINK THE FACT THAT THERE
HAS NOT BEEN A VOCIFEROUS
STUDENT LOBBY IN THIS AREA THAT
IS ADVOCATING FOR THEIR RIGHTS
AND NEEDS AROUND COLLEGE
AFFORDABILITY AND BETTER LOAN
PATHWAYS IS A VERY BIG PROBLEM
FOR THECONO EMY.
>> Brown: JUST IN OUR LAST
MINUTE, IS THIS AN AREA WE CAN
AGREE ON?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
84% OF YOUNG PEOPLE 18 TO 29 ARE
DELAYING MAJOR LIFE DECISIONS
BECAUSE OF THE POOR ECONOMY AND
BECAUSE OF THE MASSIVE STUDENT
LOAN DEBT THEY'RE UNDER.
50% ARE COMING OUT OF SCHOOL AND
CAN'T FIND FULL-TIME WORK.
WE HAVE A REAL CRISIS WITH THE
MILLENNIALS.
I THINK IT'S A GOVERNMENT CAUSED
CRISIS.
MEDDLING IN STUDENT LOANS,
MEDDLING IN THE ECONOMY HAS MADE
IT DIFFICULT FOR OUR GENERATION
TO HAVE THE KIND OF OPPORTUNITY
THAT OUR PARENTS AND
GRANDPARENTS HAD.
IT'S A MAJOR CRISIS.
WE AGREE ON THAT.
>> Brown: TO BE CONTINUED.
EVAN FEINBERG, MATTHEW SEGAL AND
ANYA KAMENETZ, THANK YOU ALL
VERY MUCH.
>> Woodruff: AND WE RETURN TO
SYRIA, FOR TWO LOOKS AT THE
CONFLICT.
RAY SUAREZ HAS MORE.
>> Suarez: AS WE REPORTED
EARLIER, THE TOP DIPLOMATS FROM
GERMANY AND THE UNITED STATES
SAID RUSSIA'S SUPPLY OF ADVANCED
AIR DEFENSE SYSTEMS WOULD ONLY
PROLONG SYRIA'S BLOODY CIVIL
WAR.
MEANWHILE, SENATOR JOHN McCAIN
SAID SYRIAN REBELS BATTLING
BASHAR AL-ASSAD NEED AMMUNITION
AND HEAVY WEAPONS TO COUNTER THE
DAMASCUS REGIME'S TANKS AND
AIRCRAFT.
McCAIN SAID THE CURRENT
BATTLEFIELD SITUATION FAVORS
ASSAD'S FORCES.
DURING A TRIP TO SYRIA, THE
ARIZONA SENATOR MET WITH THE
HEAD OF THE FREE SYRIAN ARMY
SALIMIDRIS.
MARGARET WARNER IS IN LEBANON
CONTINUING HERE SERIES OF
REPORTS ON THE SYRIAN WAR
SPILLOVER EFFECTS IN THE REGION.
EARLIER TODAY SHE SPOKE TO
GENERAL IDRIS AND SHE JOINS ME
FROM BEIRUT.
MARGARET, THE GENERAL HAD BEEN
INVOLVED IN SERIOUS FIGHTING
NEAR THE LEBANESE BORDER.
FIGHTING YOU COULD SEE IN THE
DISTANCE.
HOW DOES HE SEE THE SITUATION ON
THE GROUND IN AND AROUND CUE AI?
>> HE SAID THE SITUATION IS
REALLY QUITE DESPERATE IN THE
SENSE THAT THEY'VE RUN OUT OF
FOOD AND MEDICINE.
MANY CIVILIANS ARE DEAD, MANY
FIGHTERS ARE DEAD, MANY WOUNDED
THEY CAN NOT GET OUT AND HE
DESCRIBED THEM AS SORT OF
HUNKERED DOWN.
BUT WHEN I SAID "HOW LONG CAN
YOU HOLD OUT?"
HE SAID "FOR A VERY LONG TIME."
AND THIS THEY ARE SENDING -- THE
FREE SYRIAN ARMY IS SENDING
REINFORCEMENTS.
HE SAID THAT THEY HAD INSERTED
300 MORE FIGHTERS TODAY, THAT HE
AND HIS COMMANDERS HAD
ESTABLISHED SOME SORT OF AN
OPERATING CENTER WHERE THEY
HOPED TO GET 700 MORE FIGHTERS
NEARBY BY TOMORROW NIGHT AND
TAKE -- GET THEM IN WITH FOOD,W.
SO FAR FROM GETTING READY FOR A
DEFEAT-- WHICH IS WHAT YOU'RE
HEARING FROM SOME QUARTERS-- THE
FREE SYRIAN ARMY SEE THIS IS AS
A VERY STRATEGIC AND IMPORTANT
BATTLE AND THEY PLAN TO DOUBLE
DOWN ON IT.
>> Brown: HOW DOES IDRIS SEE
THE COMPETITIVE SITUATION
BETWEEN HIS ARMY AND ASSAD'S
CHANGING IF RUSSIA FOLLOWS
THROUGH OR HAS FOLLOWED THROUGH
ON ITS PLANS TO SEND NEW WEAPONS
TO ASSAD?
>> RAY, THAT WAS THE QUESTION.
HE SAID "I CANNOT UNDERSTAND WHY
OUR FRIENDS IN THE WEST DON'T
HELP US WHEN THEY SEE HOW MUCH
THE IRANIANS AND THE RUSSIANS
ARE DOING FOR ASSAD'S FORCES."
AND WHEN I ASKED HIM "WHAT WILL
HAPPEN IF HE SUCCESSFULLY
DELIVERS THESE SURFACE-TO-AIR
MISSILES, THESE THIS
ANTI-DEFENSE SYSTEM."
HE SAID "IT WILL MAKE ASSAD MUCH
MORE POWERFUL."
HE SAID "IF THE WEST EVER
DECIDES TO ESTABLISH A NO-FLY
ZONE IT WILL BE MUCH HARDER."
HE SAID "RIGHT NOW ASSAD'S AIR
DEFENSES ARE VERY POOR, WE KNOW
THAT.
BUT IF HE DELIVER THIS IS
ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONRY --" HE
BASICALLY WAS SAYING IT'S A GAME
CHANGER.
>> Suarez: WHAT DOES HE NEED
FROM THE WEST?
THERE HE IS TELLING YOU HE CAN'T
UNDERSTAND WHY HE ISN'T GETTING
MORE SUPPORT.
WAS HE SPECIFIC ABOUT WHAT HIS
ARMY NEEDS?
OR DOES IT NEED EVERYTHING,
REALLY?
>> WELL, IT REALLY NEEDS
EVERYTHING, BUT THEY HAVE BEEN
SAYING SINCE I WAS ON THE TURKEY
SIDE OF THE SYRIAN BORDER IN
NOVEMBER AND DECEMBER THE SAME
THING THEY'VE BEEN SAYING ALL
ALONG WHICH IS WE ARE BEING
BOMBARDD FROM THE AIR.
FOR INSTANCE, THAT'S THE
SITUATION IN QUSAIR.
THE HEZBOLLAH FIGHTERS HAVE THE
TOWN SURROUNDED BUT THEY GOT A
DAILY BOMBARDMENT FROM THE AIR.
THEY HAVE NO MEANS OF BRINGING
DOWN THESE PLANES.
THESE PLANES FLY SO HIGH, THESE
BOMBERS, YOU CAN'T EVEN SEE THEM
MOST OF THE TIME.
SO THAT'S THE NUMBER-ONE THING
THEY WANT.
THEY ALSO JUST NEED MORE
MATERIEL, PARTICULARLY
AMMUNITION.
AND BASIC SUPPLIES.
BUT THE MOST IMPORTANT THING
THEY SAY THEY NEED-- AND I'M
SURE THAT THIS IS WHAT HE TOLD
SENATOR McCAIN EARLIER THIS
WEEK-- IS THEY REALLY WANT
SOMETHING TO COUNTERACT THESE
AIRPLANES.
>> Suarez: NOW, FOR A LONG
TIME LEBANON-- WHERE YOU'VE BEEN
REPORTING THIS WEEK-- HAS BEEN
UNDER THE DOMINATION OF SYRIA.
AND IF THE COUNTRY THAT'S BEEN
DOMINATING YOU IS IN CHAOS, WHAT
DOES THAT MEAN TO YOUR OWN
COUNTRY?
WHAT'S BEEN HAPPENING IN LEBANON
NOW THAT THIS REGIONAL BULLY BOY
OF SYRIA IS DISTRACTED WITH ITS
OWN CIVIL WAR?
>> WELL, THEY HAVE BEEN
DISTRACTED FOR LAST TWO YEARS
AND PEOPLE HAVE SAID TO ME THAT,
YOU KNOW, IT IS A NEW FEELING
FOR LEBANON WHICH USUALLY TOOK
ITS ORDERS DIRECTLY -- OR
INDIRECTLY FROM THE SYRIAN
REGIME.
BOTH THROUGH THEIR INFLUENCE,
THROUGH HEZBOLLAH AND THE
GOVERNMENT AND ALSO SIMPLY BY
THE POWER OF THEIR MILITARY AND
SECRET POLICE.
AND JUST THE WHOLE NETWORK OF
INTERCONNECTIONS.
NOW IN A WAY THE TABLES HAVE
TURNED.
SYRIA IS LOOKING TO HEZBOLLAH
FOR HELP.
BUT THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT IS
REALLY POWERLESS OR SEEMS
POWERLESS TO, FOR INSTANCE, SEAL
THAT BOARD CHER IS ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT THE GENERAL IDRIS IS
ASKING, KEEP THE HAMAS FIGHTERS
TO GETTING IN.
SO I THINK THAT FOR A COUNTRY
LIKE LEBANON WHICH SUFFERED
THROUGH A 15-YEAR CIVIL WAR AND
THEN ANOTHER 15 MORE YEARS AFTER
THE CIVIL WAR OF OCCUPATION BY
THE SYRIANS, THIS IS AN
UNEXPECTED KIND OF FREEDOM BUT
ONE THEY ARE REALLY NOT READY TO
HANDLE YET.
>> Suarez: OUR MARGARET WARNER
JOINING US FROM BEIRUT.
THANKS A LOT, MARGARET.
WE TURN NOW TO ANOTHER NATION
STRUGGLING TO COPE WITH THE
CHAOS IN NEXT DOOR SYRIA, THE
KINGDOM OF JORDAN.
THE COUNTRY IS NOW HOME TO
ROUGHLY A THIRD OF SYRIA'S
ESTIMATED MILLION AND A HALF
REFUGEES.
THE NEWSHOUR'S FOREIGN EDITOR
JUSTIN KENNY TRAVELED TO THE
KINGDOM LAST WEEK AND PRODUCED
THIS REPORT.
>> Reporter: THIS IS ZATARI,
IT'S NOW SECOND-LARGEST REFUGEE
CAMP ON EARTH.
JUST OVER A YEAR AGO, THE SITE
DIDN'T EXIST.
JORDAN'S KING ABDULLAH NOW CALLS
IT HIS COUNTRY'S FIFTH-LARGEST
CITY.
MORE THAN 120,000 SYRIAN
REFUGEES-- INCLUDING 60,000
CHILDREN-- ARE PACKED INTO THE
CAMP LIVING IN TENTS AND
TRAILERS ON FIVE SQUARE MILES OF
DRY AND DUSTY GROUND.
JUST 15 MILES FROM THEIR
HOMELAND'S BORDER, THEY OFTEN
CAN HEAR THE FIGHTING BETWEEN
THE FORCES OF SYRIAN PRESIDENT
BASHAR AL-ASSAD AND THE REBEL
FREE SYRIAN ARMY.
THE REFUGEES ARE OUT OF THE WAR
ZONE, BUT THEY FACE PLENTY OF
NEW CHALLENGES.
>> (translated): MY CHILDREN
HAVE ALL BEEN SICK FOR 20 DAYS
NOW.
>> Reporter: 25-YEAR-OLD NADIA
RAJA AND HER FIVE CHILDREN
ARRIVED FROM SYRIA FIVE WEEKS
AGO.
>> (translated): THEY HAVE
FEVERS.
THEY ARE SUFFERING FROM THE HOT
WEATHER, THE POLLUTED WATER, AND
FROM THEIR SITUATION IN GENERAL
IN THE CAMPS BECAUSE OF THE
HEAT.
>> Reporter: A CLEAN TENT
DIDN'T PROTECT THE FAMILY FROM
ZAATARI'S FLY INFESTATION.
TO SAY THAT LIFE IN THE CAMP IS
HARD IS AN UNDERSTATEMENT BY
NEARLY ANY DEFINITION.
IN THE WINTER RESIDENTS ENDURE
SNOWSTORMS AND FLOODING.
IN THE SUMMER THEY STRUGGLE TO
SURVIVE TEMPERATURES THAT SHOOT
ABOVE 100 DEGREES FAHRENHEIT
WITH ONLY LIMITED WATER AND NO
ELECTRICITY.
MEMBERS OF THE INTERNATIONAL AID
COMMUNITY SAY THEY'RE STRAINING
TO KEEP UP WITH THE BALLOONING
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS.
>> I DON'T THINK YOU CAN THINK
IT CAN GET ANY WORSE BUT IT DOES
EVERY NIGHT.
>> Suarez: ANDREW HARPER IS THE
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER
FOR REFUGEES REPRESENTATIVE TO
JORDAN.
HIS ORGANIZATION OVERSEES THE
CAMP IN COORDINATION WITH THE
JORDANIAN GOVERNMENT AND MANY
OTHER INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN
ORGANIZATIONS.
>> THERE'S OVER 500,000 SYRIANS
THAT HAVE COME THROUGH SINCE
MARCH OF LAST YEAR, ANYWHERE UP
TO 3,000 TO 4,000 PER NIGHT,
WHICH BASICALLY MEANS A THOUSAND
FAMILIES.
THIS MEANS A THOUSAND FAMILIES
WITH WOMEN AND CHILDREN WHO COME
ACROSS WITH NOTHING, AND WE HAVE
TO PROVIDE EVERYTHING FOR THEM--
THE TENTS, THE FOOD, THE WATER,
THE HEALTH FACILITIES AND THECT.
>> Suarez: A CONSTANT STREAM OF
AID TRUCKS-- NEARLY 500 PER DAY,
ACCORDING TO U.N.H.C.R.-- DROP
OFF SUPPLIES, INCLUDING WATER.
THERE ARE WELL-ORGANIZED
DISTRIBUTION CENTERS, AND
MEDICAL FACILITIES, AND SCHOOLS
IN THE CAMP.
DESPITE THAT, RESIDENTS SAID
THEY DON'T HAVE ENOUGH TO EAT,
CLEAN WATER TO DRINK, OR
ADEQUATE MEDICAL CARE.
ONLY 20% OF ZAATARI'S CHILDREN
ATTEND CLASSES IN THE CAMP.
TEN-YEAR-OLD HANIN HARIRI FLED
TO JORDAN WITH HER FAMILY TEN
MONTHS AGO:
>> WE DONT DO ANYTHING.
WE SIT IN THE TENTS ALL THE
TIME.
WE DON'T PLAY ANYMORE.
> Su>arez: 20-YEAR-OLD ABDUL
MOUNIM DROUBI WORKS AT A BAKERY
IN THE CAMP'S MAKESHIFT MARKET.
UNLIKE MANY OTHERS HE IS ABLE TO
EARN MEAGER WAGES.
HE STILL SAYS, HOWEVER, THAT
HE'D RATHER GO HOME TO WAR THAN
CONTINUE LIVING AS A REFUGEE IN
ZAATARI.
>> IT'S BETTER TO DIE THERE
ACTUALLY, BECAUSE HERE YOU WOULD
DIE FROM HUNGER.
>> Suarez: MANY SYRIAN REFUGEES
APPARENTLY FEEL THE SAME WAY.
THE JORDANIAN GOVERNMENT
ANNOUNCED THIS WEEK THAT 60,000
OF THEM HAVE RETURNED HOME.
DESPITE THE EXODUS, MORE
REFUGEES CONTINUE TO POUR INTO
THE HASHEMITE KINGDOM EVERY DAY,
AND THIS HAS PUT AN ENORMOUS
STRAIN ON JORDAN.
IT'S A RELATIVELY POOR COUNTRY
THAT ALREADY HOSTS HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF REFUGEES FROM THE
IRAQ WAR AND MORE THAN TWO
MILLION PALESTINIAN REFUGEES
THAT HAVE COME IN VARIOUS WAVES
OVER THE PAST 65 YEARS.
LAST WEEK, THE COUNTRY TOOK OUT
A $150 MILLION WORLD BANK LOAN
TO DEAL WITH REFUGEE CRISIS, AND
KING ABDULLAH MADE A PLEA FOR
HELP AT A WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM.
>> OUR JORDANIAN POPULATION IS
NOW HOSTING 10% OF ITS SIZE IN
SYRIAN REFUGEES, AND THIS MAY
DOUBLE BY YEAR END.
JORDANIANS ARE GENEROUSLY
SHARING SCARCE WATER AND OTHER
RESOURCES.
FOR HOST COUNTRIES LIKE US AND
LEBANON, FOR DISPLACED AND
VULNERABLE SYRIANS, BOTH INSIDE
AND OUTSIDE THEIR COUNTRY,
INCREASED HUMANITARIAN
ASSISTANCE FROM THE GLOBAL
COMMUNITY IS VITAL.
>> Suarez: MARWAN MUASHER
JORDAN'S FORMER FOREIGN MINISTER
AND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER IS NOW
A VICE PRESIDENT AT THE CARNEGIE
ENDOWMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL
PEACE.
>> YOU CANNOT, UNDER ANY
CIRCUMSTANCES, DEAL WITH 20% OF
YOUR POPULATION OVERNIGHT COMING
TO THE COUNTRY.
WE ARE I THINK COMING TO THE
LIMIT OF THE SITUATION TODAY.
THE ECONOMY IS ALREADY
SUFFERING.
EVEN WITHOUT THE SYRIAN CRISIS
THERE'S AT LEAST A 12% BUDGET
DEFICIT.
WATER IS SCARCE AND HAS BEEN
SCARCE THROUGHOUT JORDAN'S
HISTORY.
THE INFRASTRUCTURE CANNOT JUST
ABSORB ALL THESE PEOPLE.
>> Suarez: NOWHERE IS THE IMPACT
ON JORDAN'S OWN POPULATION MORE
APPARENT THAN IN THE NORTH.
MOST OF THE COUNTRY'S 500,000
SYRIAN REFUGEES LIVE OUTSIDE
CAMPS AND MANY HAVE SETTLED IN
PLACES LIKE RAMTHA ON THE SYRIAN
BORDER.
THE CITY DEPENDED ON CROSS-
BORDER TRADE WITH ITS SISTER
CITY DA'RAA.
THAT TRADE IS NONEXISTENT TODAY,
AND RAMTHA'S POPULATION HAS
SURGED WITH REFUGEES.
THE COST OF RENT, FOOD, AND
WATER ARE UP; EMPLOYMENT AND
WAGES ARE DOWN.
JORDANIAN ALI ZOUBI ATTMEPTS TO
EKE OUT A LIVING BY WORKING AT
VARIOUS BUSINESSES OWNEBYD
RELATIVES IN RAMTHA, INCLUDING
HIS UNCLE'S SHOE STORE.
>> (translated): THE ECONOMY
HAS BEEN HIT VERY HARD.
I FEEL BAD FOR THE SYRIANS, THEY
HAD TO ALL LEAVE THEIR HOMES.
I'M NOT BLAMING THEM, THEY WERE
FORCED TO COME HERE, THEY LOST
FAMILY MEMBERS, BROTHERS AND
SISTERS.
BUT WITH JORDANIANS THINGS ARE
JORDAN IS A POOR COUNTRY AND THE
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS ARE BAD.
>> Suarez: TALK TO SYRIAN
REFUGEES OR JORDANIANS, AND IT'S
TOUGH TO FIND PEOPLE WHO EXPECT
A POLITICAL SUTIOOLN INSTEAD OF
MORE WAR.
VIRTUALLY ALL OF THE REFUGEES
INTERVIEWED SUPPORTED ARMING THE
OPPOSITION.
THE JORDANI GOVANERNMENT,
HOWEVER, HAS PUBLICLY STATED
THAT IT IS AGAINST PROVIDING
ARMS TO THE FREE-SYRIAN ARMY.
>> ARMING THE OPPOSITION, AT
LEAST SO FAR, IS STILL A
PROBLEMATIC ISSUE.
IT'S NOT CLEAR THE ARMING THE
OPPOSITION WOULD LEAD TO A
POLITICAL PROCESS THAT WOULD END
THE CONFLICT.
ITS NOT CLEAR THE ARMING THE
OPPOSITION WOULD LEAD TO A
REVERSAL OF THE MILITARY
SITUATION ON THE GROUND.
IN A COUNTRY SUCH AS JORDAN, A
NEIGHBOR TO SYRIA, JORDAN WOULD
BE VERY CONCERNED THAT IT WOULD
BE SEEN AS INTERFERING IN THE
CONCERNS OF A NEIGHBOR STATE.
AND IT IS JORDAN'S BELIEF THAT
IS UP TO SYRIANS TO DECIDE, NOT
AN OUTSIDE POWER.
>> Suarez: BACK AT ZAATARI,
THERE ARE TOUGH DECISIONS TO BE
MADE, SAYS ANDREW HARPER,
INCLUDING CUTTING BACK WATER AND
FOOD RATION AMOUNTS AS THE
CONFLICT DRAGS ON.
HARPER THINKS IT MAY LAST A LONG
WHILE.
>> THERE'S NOBODY THAT CAN GIVE
ME ONE POSITIVE INDICATOR THAT
THIS CAN BE RESOLVED ANY TIME
SOON, WHETHER IT BE ONE YEAR,
TWO YEARS OR BEYOND THAT.
WHENEVER PEOPLE DELAY A MEENGTI
FOR A MONTH, IT PROBABLY MEANS
ANOTHER 6,000 DEAD IN SYRIA, IT
PROBABLY MEANS ANOTHER 40,000,
50,000, 60,000, 70,000 REFUGEES.
THE BUREAUCRATIC TIMELINE DOES
NOT MEET THE HUMANITARIAN
TIMELINE, NOR THE POLITICAL
IMPERATIVE.
WE DO NOT SEE IT AS
DEMONSTRATING THE NECESSARY
URGENCY OR IMPORTANCE THAT THESE
PEOPLE DEMAND.
>> Suarez: NADIA RAJA SAYS SHE
HAS NO IDEA HOW LONG SHE AND
HER FAMILY WILL REMAIN REFUGEES.
>> (translated): IT'S HARD TO
KNOW.
THERE'S NO ELECTRICITY, THERE'S
NO TV, WE DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
GOING ON IN THE WORLD.
>> Suarez: SHE AND THE OTHERS
HOLD OUT VARYING DEGREES OF HOPE
OF RETURNING TO SYRIA.
UNTIL THAT DAY COMES, IF IT
COMES, THEY SHARE THE HOPE THE
WORLD DOESN'T FORGET ABOUT THEM.
>> Woodruff: AND TO THE ANALYSIS
OF SHIELDS AND BROOKS:
SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS, AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
WELCOME BACK, GENTLEMEN.
GOOD TO HAVE YOU BOTH WITH US.
SO, MARK, THIS TERRIBLE
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS SPILLING
ACROSS THE BORDER INTO JORDAN.
DOES IS THPUT MORE PRESSURE ON
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION TO DO
SOMETHING?
>> I THINK IT DOES IN A
HUMANITARIAN SENSE, JUDY.
THE RESISTANCE TO AMERICA DOING
ANYTHING IN A MILITARY WAY IS
OBVIOUSLY SHAPED AND DETERMINED
DECADE OF
AFGHANISTAN AND IRAQ AND
AMERICANS' RELUCTANCE TO GO INTO
IT.
BUT WHEN YOU SEE THE PIECE THAT
RAY JUST PRESENTED AND THE HUMAN
FACE OF THE SUFFERING, THESE ARE
THE POOREST OF THE PEOPLE GOING
TO THE POOREST OF LEBANON.
CHILDREN WITHOUT SCHOOL, WITHOUT
JOY, WITHOUT LAUGHTER AND PEOPLE
WITHOUT HOPE OR FUTURE.
AT A HUMANITARIAN LEVEL IT CRIES
FOR ENGAGEMENT AND GENEROSITY.
>GENEROSITY.
>> Woodruff: WE KNOW JOHN
McCAIN IS SAYING THE UNITED
STATES MUST GIVE AMMUNITION, HE
SAID, AND HEAVY WEAPONS.
HE SAID THE REBELS WILL LOSE.
>> YEAH, WELL I'M SOMEWHAT MORE
SYMPATHETIC TO THAT AS TIME GOES
BY AND NOBODY IS
THE NEXT SYRIA IS LOOK LAKE AND
IT WOULD BE NICE IF THE SYRIANS
WOULD SOLVE WITHIN THE SYRIAN
CONTEXT BUT THE RUSSIAN AND
IRANIANS AND THROUGH IRAN,
HEZBOLLAH OR HEZBOLLAH THROUGH
IRAN ARE INVOLVE SOD THE
GOVERNMENT IS GETTING OUTSIDE
HELP AND IT SEEMS THAT'S
CREATING A STRONG IMBALANCE
ASSAD WILL SURVIVE, CONTINUE TO
HAVE THE REGIME HE'S BEEN HAVING
AND TO ME IT SEEMED MORE
COMPELLING BOTH ON HUMANITARIAN
GROUND E THE REBEL
FORCE AND FINALLY JUST TO DEAL A
BLOW TO HAZARD AND IRAN.
FOR OUR OWN NATIONAL INTEREST I
THINK MAKING SURE HEZBOLLAH AND
IRAN DON'T HAVE A VICTORY IN
SYRIA IS AN IMPORTANT PART OF
RESHAPING THE MIDDLE EAST.
SO I THINK THE CASE FOR DOING
SOMETHING EITHER JOHN McCAIN
SAYS OR NO-FLY ZONES, WE'RE MORE
IMPELLED.
>> Woodruff: DO AMERICANS HAVE
THE APPETITE FOR THAT?
>> NO, THEY DON'T AND I THINK
NO-FLY ZONE-- WITH RESPECT TO
JOHN McCAIN-- IS AN
UNREALISTIC OBJECTIVE.
I THINK THE RUSSIANS MAY HAVE
PUSHED BY THE WRONG RANGE
MISSILES THEY'RE INTRODUCING IN
A THEATER.
THEY MAY, IN FACT, PROVOKE THE
UNITED STATES AND EVERYBODY ELSE
TO DO WHAT THEY HADN'T
CONTEMPLATED DOING AND WOULD NOT
DO ON THEIR OWN.
IT'S TERRIBLE TO THINK OF AWARD
BY PROXY BUT THAT COULD BE
WHAT'S ON THE HORIZON RIGHT NOW.
>> IT'S NOT LIKE WE WOULD BE
ALONE.
THE EUROPEANS ARE WAY AHEAD OF
US.
I THINK IT WOULD BE A REASONABLY
BROAD COALITION.
WHAT IT WOULD LEAD TO AS FAR AS
THE SYRIAN FUTURE, TO BE FAIR,
NO ONE KNOWS THAT AND SO THAT'S,
I THINK WHY THE HESITANCY FROM
THE WHITE HOUSE.
>> Woodruff: IT'S A TOUGH ONE.
LET'S COME BACK HERE TO THE
UNITED STATES WRAO WHERE ALL THE
PROBLEMS ARE EASILY SOLVED.
THE PRESIDENT, DAVID, IT LOOKS
LIKE HE'S GETTING READY TO
ANNOUNCE THE NUMBER-TWO MAN AT
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT UNDER
PRESIDENT BUSH TO HEAD THE
F.B.I.
JAMES COMEY.
SMART MOVE?
>> I THINK EXTREMELY SMART.
BIPARTISAN IN THE FIRST PLACE
BUT JUST IN TERMS OF AN
OUTSTANDING PUBLIC SERVANT.
I HAVE NEVER INTERVIEWED HIM, I
DON'T KNOW HIM PERSONALLY BUT I
WENT BACK TODAY AND REWATCHED --
HE GAVE TESTIMONY AFTER A VERY
DRAMATIC INCIDENT WHICH HAS BEEN
WIDELY TALKED ABOUT.
THERE WAS A DOMESTIC
SURVEILLANCE PROGRAM IN THE BUSH
WHITE HOUSE THAT SOME PEOPLE IN
THE WHITE HOUSE-- AND THE VICE
PRESIDENT'S OFFICE-- WANTED TO
CONTINUE.
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT DECIDED
THAT IT WAS NOT A LEGAL PROGRAM
AND THEY WERE GOING TO NOT
EXTEND IT.
AND THE WHITE HOUSE CHIEF OF
STAFF AND THE PRESIDENT'S
COUNCIL WENT TO THE HOSPITAL
ROOM OF JOHN ASHCROFT, THE
ATTORNEY GENERAL, TO GET HIM TO
OVERRULE THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
AND COMEY AND BOB MUELLER AND
SOME OTHERS PHYSICALLY STOOD
THERE AND SAID "NO, THIS IS OUR
RULING, WE'RE STICKING WITH THIS
RULING."
ASHCROFT STOOD WITH THEM.
AND TO STAND UP AS A MID-LEVEL
CIVIL SERVANT AGAINST THE CHIEF
OF STAFF AND THE WHITE HOUSE,
THAT TAKES ENORMOUS COURAGE AND
IF ANYBODY WANTS TO SEE HOW TO
TESTIFY BEFORE CONGRESS, GO ON
YOUTUBE AND WATCH THIS
TESTIMONY.
IT'S EXEMPLARY IN HOW HE
PRESENTS HIMSELF.
>> Woodruff: IS THIS A SLAM
DUNK IN TERMS OF CONFIRMATION IF
HE'S NOMINAT?ED
HE STILL HASN'T BEEN NOMINATED.
>> IF HE ISN'T NOMINATED I DON'T
THINK HE WILL BE CONFIRMED JUDY,
THAT'S THE WAY IT WORKS.
(LAUGHTER)
IT WAS AN INSPIRED AND BRILLIANT
CHOICE, I DO.
ON SUBSTANCE AND POLITICALLY.
CHUCK HAGEL, WHO IS A
REPUBLICAN, HAD BEEN A FRIEND OF
BARACK OBAMA'S, EVEN A
SUPPORTER.
JAMES COMEY IS NOT POLITICAL AT
ALL.
THERE'S NOTHING PARTISAN ABOUT
HIM.
HE IS A REPUBLICAN, HE'S A
REGISTERED REPUBLICAN BUT HE'S
MOST OF ALL A PUBLIC SERVANT A
TIME WHEN TRUST AND CONFIDENCE
IN GOVERNMENT IS IN THE CELLAR,
DEEP IN THE BASEMENT.
I MEAN, THIS IS A MAN WHO
EXEMPLIFIES PROFILE IN COURAGE,
AS DAVE HAS JUST DESCRIBED AND
PUBLIC SERVICE AT ITS BEST.
I THINK IT'S A REMARKABLE CHOICE
AND HE GAVE US PATRICK
FITZGERALD AND PROBABLY -- BUT
DAVID DESCRIBED HIS STANDING --
>> Woodruff: WHO WAS THE
SPECIAL PROSECUTOR?
>> SPECIAL PROSECUTOR WHO, OF
COURSE, LED THE INVESTIGATION OF
THE WHOLE LEAKING OF VALERIE
PLAME AND RESULTED IN THE
PRESIDENT'S CHIEF OF STAFF --
THE VICE PRESIDENT'S CHIEF OF
STAFF BEING CONVICTED.
AND AT THE SAME TIME LED TO THE
BREACH, QUITE FRANKLY,
POLITICALLY,-- NOT THAT IT WAS
INTENDED-- BETWEEN GEORGE BUSH
AND DICK CHENEY.
I MEAN, TT WHAAS THE CLEAVAGE,
COMEY WAS -- I MEAN NOT THAT
COMEY SET OUT TO DO IT BUT
BECAUSE HE DID STAND UP AND HE
DID WARN THAT ENHANCED
INTERROGATION AND WATERBOARDING
WOULD COME BACK -- IT WOULD BE
REVEALED AND IT WOULD COME BACK
AND HUMILIATE AND HURT THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND HE
WAS ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: SO DOES THE
PRESIDENT, DAVID, THEN AVOID A
FIGHT BY CHOOSING HIM?
>> RIGHT.
HE AVOIDS A FIGHT.
THE OTHER POTENTIAL TALKED ABOUT
PERSON WAS SORT OF INVOLVED IN
BENGHAZI IN TANGENTIAL WAYS SO
THERE WAS AN OPPORTUNITY THAT
THE CONFIRMATION HEARING WOULD
TURN INTO ANOTHER BENGHAZI
OCCASION SO IF THE NOMINATION
COMES THROUGH I'D BE VISED IF
THERE WAS MUCH FIGHTING.
>> Brown: THERE WOULD BE SOME
CRITICISM FROM THE AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION AND THOSE
ON THE LEFT BUT POLITICALLY
SPEAKING, PRAGMATICALLY, THAT'S
AN IDEAL NOMINATION FOR BARACK
OBAMA TO MAKE TO HAVE AN F.B.I.
DIRECTOR WHO THE ONLY CRITICS OF
IS FROM THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION, WHICH IS, YOU
KNOW, NOT PROBABLY CONSIDERED A
FORMIDABLE POLITICALLY.
>> Woodruff: WELL, THIS COMES
AT THE SAME TIME THE
ADMINISTRATION IS -- THE NAME IS
FLOATED AT THE SAME TIME THE
ADMINISTRATION IS UNDER A LOT OF
FIRE FROM THE NEWS MEDIA AND,
FRANKLY, FROM JUST ABOUT
EVERYBODY FOR THE WAY THEY HAVE
INVESTIGATED THE PRESS
AGGRESSIVELY, MARK.
LOOKING FOR WHOEVER GOT A LEAK,
A STORY FROM -- IN THE FORM OF
CLASSIFIED INFORMATION FROM THE
ADMINISTRATION.
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
PARTICULARLY UNDER FIRE.
HE'S BEEN HAVING MEETINGS THE
LAST TWO DAYS WITH NEWS MEDIA
EXECUTIVES.
WHAT DOES ALL THIS SAY?
IS THE ADMINISTRATION TKR-RB
THEY ABLE TO PUT THIS BEHIND
THEM BY TALKING TO THE PERES
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENED?
>> WELL, THEY'RE PLAYING
DEFENSE, JUDY.
THEY'RE TRYING TO MAKE UP FOR
IT.
THIS IS THE FIRST TIME, REALLY
SINCE RICHARD NIXON'S
ADMINISTRATION AND THE -- NEIL
SHEEHAN OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES,"
THE REPORTER WHO PUBLISHED AND
REPORTED ON THE ELSEBURG CASE,
THE ELSEBURG PAPERS ABOUT THE
UNITED STATES DEEP INVOLVEMENT
IN BACKGROUND ON VIETNAM WHICH
THE ADMINISTRATION THEN DID NOT
WANT PUBLISHED.
IT'S THE FIRST TIME THEY'VE
INVOKED A MEMBER OF THE PRESS, A
REPORTER, AS A CO COCONSPIRATOR
UNDER THE ESPIONAGE ACT AND THIS
WAS WHAT WAS DONE TO JIM ROSE OF
FOX NEWS AND THE INVESTIGATION.
SO THERE HAS BEEN AN
UNDERSTANDABLE AND PREDICTABLE
AND VERY LOUD AND VOCAL CRY ON
THE PART OF THE PRESS THAT -- I
MEAN, THIS IS MORE THAN
CHILLING, IT'S REALLY PUNITIVE.
>> Woodruff: WHERE IS THIS
HEADING, DAVID?
>> THEY'RE TRYING TO REWRITE THE
RULES BUT THEY'RE HANDLING IT
VERY INEPTLY, I WOULD SAY.
THERE WAS TESTIMONY FROM HOLDER
THAT THEY WERE NOT DOING
PROSECUTING OF PERES PEOPLE AT
THE SAME TIME THEY WERE AT LEAST
WALKING UP CLOSE TO THAT SO
THERE'S SOME PROBLEM WITH THE
TESTIMONY AND THEN THEY'VE
CLEARLY SIGNALED THIS WEEK THAT
THEY'RE UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THE
RULES AS THEY EXIST AND TO ME
THAT'S NOT CLOSE TO BEING
ENOUGH, THEY SHOULD BE APPALLED
BY THE RULES AS THEY NOW EXIST
BUT NONETHELESS THEY'RE SHOWING
A LITTLE SENSE OF REMORSE OR
PSEUDOREMORSE, A SENSE OF OKAY,
WE'RE GOING TO FIX THIS.
>> Woodruff: DID YOU SAY SUE
DOPSEUDOREMORSE?
>> WELL, YOU CAN'T TELL WHAT
THEY'RE FEELING AND YES WE'LL
ADJUST IT BUT HOW MUCH, YES THE
WHITE HOUSE WILL CHANGE IT BUT
HOW MUCH?
SO THEY HAD THIS OFF-THE-RECORD
BRIEFING WHICH WAS LEAKED
IMMEDIATEFULLY WHICH THEY WERE
NOT CLEAR EVEN THEN ABOUT WHAT
THEY WANTED TO DO.
SO THERE WAS JUST A LOT OF
FUZZINESS BUT A LITTLE SAYING
WE'RE SORRY, WE'RE SORRY.
BUT WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO DO?
>> Woodruff: A LOT OF THE
MEDIA EXECUTIVES DIDN'T WANT TO
PARTICIPATE IN THESE MEETINGS AS
LONG AS THEY WERE OFF THE
RECORD.
>> EXACTLY.
AND PSEUDOREMORSE IS LIKE A
LIMITED MEA CULPA.
KIND OF "WE DIDN'T WANT DO
ANYTHING WRONG BUT WE WANT TO
REEXAMINE WHAT WE'RE DOING."
>> Woodruff: SO POLITICS.
THE TEA PARTY SEEMS TO BE
GETTING MORE ATTENTION SINCE THE
I.R.S. CONTROVERSY AND WE
HAVEN'T TALKED ABOUT THAT IN A
FEW WEEKS.
BUT THE OTHER THING ABOUT THE
TEA PARTY IS THIS WEEK MICHELE
BACHMANN, WHO IS AR PROMINENT
MEMBER OF THE TEA PARTY
ANNOUNCED, DAVID, SHE'S NOT
RUNNING FOR REELECTION TO HER
CONGRESSIONAL SEAT WHICH I THINK
GIVES US A REASON TO LOOK AT
WHAT'S HAPPENED WITH THE TEA
PARTY.
THERE WAS A SENSE LAST YEAR THAT
THEY WERE LOSING SOME STEAM.
ARE THEY COMING BACK?
I MEAN, NOW WE'RE READING THAT
THEY'RE PICKING UP DONATIONS,
MARK, PICKING UP NEW MEMBERS.
>> WELL, IF YOU SPEND A COUPLE
YEARS SAYING "THE I.R.S. IS OUT
TO GET US" THEN IT TURNS OUT THE
I.R.S. IS OUT TO GET YOU IT WILL
HELP YOU WITH YOUR FUND-RAISING.
SO I THINK IT LOOKS LIKE THEY'RE
NOT LOSING STEAM AND I DON'T
THINK MICHELE BACHMANN LEAVING
THE STAGE IS GOING TO HURT AT
ALL.
IT'S NOT A LEADER DRIVEN
MOVEMENT.
IT IS A GRASS-ROOTS MOVEMENT SO
I THINK THEY'LL BE A PERMANENT
PART OF THE PARTY.
THE RELATIVE STRENGTH OF THE TEA
PARTY VERSUS THE ESTABLISHMENT
PART OF THE TEA PARTY WHERE L
VARY ISSUE TO ISSUE.
I THINK ON THE IMMIGRATION PART
OF THE ISSUE THE ESTABLISHMENT
PART OF THE PARTY IS DOING VERY
WELL.
IT LOOKS LIKE THERE WILL BE A
LOT OF VOTES IN THE SENATE FOR
THAT.
BETTER THAN 50-50 BOTH HOUSE BUS
CERTAINLY THE SENATE.
SO THAT'S A SIGN OF STRENGTH.
THE SIGN OF WEAKNESS, THOUGH,
FOR THE PARTY AS A WHOLE IS
THEY'RE HAVING TROUBLE
RECRUITING CANDIDATES IN A LOT
OF PLACES: COLORADO, VIRGINIA,
THERE'S A GOOD "NATIONAL
JOURNAL" STORY ON THIS.
AND I THINK ONE OF THE REASONS
THEY'RE PROBABLY HAVING SOME
TROUBLE IS A LOT OF WHAT YOU
WOULD CALL TABLESISHED
REPUBLICANS DON'T WANT TO HAVE A
WAR WITH A TEA PARTY CANDIDATE
SO THEY'RE MORE HIS TENT TO SAY
"OKAY, I'LL RUN FOR SENATE, FOR
GOVERNOR, FOR WHATEVER."
>> THEY DO NOT HAVE -- THE RABBS
HAVE CLEAR SHOTS IN IOWA FOR THE
UNITED STATES SENATE.
IN MINNESOTA AGAINST AL FRANKEN
WHO WON IN A SQUEAKER AND DIDN'T
GET THE SEAT FOR NINE MONTHS
AFTER THE ELECTION.
THEY CAN'T GET A CANDIDATE.
THEY CAN'T GET LEGITIMATE
MAINSTREAM --
>> Woodruff: WHY IS THAT?
>> I THINK BECAUSE THE
INFLUENCE, THE ENERGY, THE
INFLUENCE IS DISPROPORTIONATE OF
THE TEA PARTY IN THESE STATES
AND IN THE NOMINATING PROCESS.
WE JUST SAW IT IN VIRGINIA WHERE
BISHOP E.W. JACKSON WAS
NOMINATED AT CONVENTION FOR
LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR AND THEY'RE
RUNNING AWAY FROM EACH OTHER.
>> Woodruff: VERY,
CONSERVATIVE.
>> VERY, VERY CONSERVATIVE.
I DO THINK IT HAS ITS INFLUENCE
AND POWER IN THE HOUSE
REPUBLICAN CAUCUS AND THAT IS A
PROBLEM FOR JOHN BOEHNER, A
PROBLEM FOR ERIC CANTOR WHO'S
TRIED TO COME UP WITH AN
ALTERNATIVE REPUBLICAN PROGRAM,
THE KIND THAT HAVE THAT BOB DOLE
URGED THEM TO HAVE AND HE'S BEEN
RAINED ON BY THE TEA PARTY
MEMBERS AND THE CONSERVATIVE
CAUCUS SO I THINK THERE'S AN
ENERGY THAT THEY HAVE BUT I
REALLY DO THINK THERE ARE
ROADBLOCKS AND THEY CERTAINLY
INTHEUBT REPUBLICANS BEING
COMPETITIVE NATIONALLY AT A
PRESIDENTIAL LEVEL.
>> Woodruff: TO BE CONTINUED.
WE APPRECIATE THE ENERGY BOTH OF
YOU BRING EVERY WEEK.
MARK SHIELDS, DAVID BROOKS.
AND MARK AND DAVID KEEP UP THE
TALK ON THE DOUBLEHEADER,
RECORDED IN OUR NEWSROOM.
THAT WILL BE POSTED AT THE TOP
OF THE RUNDOWN LATER TONIGHT.
AND DON'T MISS OUR SPECIAL, LIVE
DOUBLEHEADER, WHEN THE GUYS WILL
TAKE YOUR QUESTIONS, ON JUNE 21.
>> Brown: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
ANNOUNCED THE OUTLOOK FOR
MEDICARE HAS IMPROVED MODESTLY,
AND SOCIAL SECURITY IS UNCHANGED
OVER A YEAR AGO.
A SEPARATE FEDERAL RESERVE STUDY
FOUND SOME AMERICANS ARE
REBOUNDING FROM THE ECONOMIC
RECESSION, BUT OTHERS CONTINUE
TO STRUGGLE.
AND, PRESIDENT OBAMA PRESSED
CONGRESS TO PREVENT STUDENT LOAN
RATES FROM DOUBLING IN A MONTH
.
>> Woodruff:  ONLINE, SIZING UP
THE STATE OF ECONOMIC
INEQUALITY.
KWAME HOLMAN HAS MORE.
>> Holman: IS THE 99% FALLING
EVEN FURTHER BEHIND THE 1%?
ONE OF OUR READERS POSED THE
QUESTION, AND SO WE PUT
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT PAUL
SOLMAN ON THE CASE.
HE PICKS UP THE DISCUSSION ON
OUR "MAKING SENSE" PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
JUDY?
>> Woodruff: BEFORE WE GO
TONIGHT, WE'D LIKE TO REMEMBER
ONE OF OUR OWN.
JULIAN DAWKINS WORKED AS A
SHUTTLE DRIVER AT THE NEWSHOUR
FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS.
HE WAS FATALLY SHOT IN THE EARLY
HOURS OF MAY 22 BY AN
OFF-DUTY POLICE OFFICER.
LAST NIGHT, THAT SHERIFF'S
DEPUTY WAS ARRESTED AND CHARGED
WITH JULIAN'S MURDER.
SINCE JULIAN'S DEATH, FRIENDS
AND FAMILY HAVE CREATED A
MAKESHIFT MEMORIAL AT THE SITE
WHERE HE WAS SLAIN, NEAR HIS
AUNT'S HOUSE IN A WASHINGTON
SUBURB.
AND TODAY, HUNDREDS GATHERED FOR
HIS FUNERAL IN ALEXANDRIA,
VIRGINIA.
THE CROWD WAS SO LARGE IT
SPILLED OUT INTO THE STREET.
TO US, JULIAN WAS A SWEET MAN
WHO BRIGHTENED OUR DAYS WITH HIS
WARM SMILE.
AND WE MISS HIM.
YOU CAN GO TO OUR WEB SITE TO
READ GWEN IFILL'S EULOGY FROM
TODAY'S SERVICE.
THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Brown: AND I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
"WASHINGTON WEEK" CAN BE SEEN
LATER THIS EVENING ON MOST
PBS STATIONS.
WE'LL SEE YOU
ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
MONDAY EVENING.
HAVE A NICE WEEND.EK
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
GOOD NIGHT.